Hello and welcome to my course on modern C++ concurrency.
We're going to start off by finding out what concurrency actually means.
So this is an introduction to concurrency.
Concurrency generally means two or more things happening at the same time.
So, for example, you could be watching a video on Udemy, you could be taking notes or typing code
into a compiler, and that would be an example of human concurrency.
In computing, it normally means that the activities are conceptually different.
So, for example, we may have a program that takes a long time to run.
It could be fetching data from the Internet or doing a calculation that takes a long time.
And normally the program will provide some kind of feedback, like an hourglass or a counter to let
you know that things are still happening and the program hasn't died.
So that's an example of computational concurrency.
At the operating system level, concurrency has been standard for many years. On this laptop, for
example, which runs Windows, I have a recording program which is recording my words of wisdom.
I have PowerPoint, which is waiting for me to go to the next slide.
I have an e-mail program which is occasionally checking for new messages.
I have File Explorer in case I want to open another PowerPoint presentation and so on.
So the computer is running several different programs at the same time.
However, until pretty recently, computers only had one processing unit, so if you only have one processor,
how can you run several different programs at the same time?
And the answer is something called "time slicing".
So this means that one program gets to run for a little bit of time.
Then it stops and another program gets to run.
Then that one stops and something else runs and so on.
So, for example, if I'm writing a document while I'm waiting for my compilation to finish, we could
have a situation where the compiler gets to run for a little bit, then the email program runs and
checks.
If I've got any new messages, then the compiler runs again, then the word processor runs and sees if I've typed
any more words and so on.
And if this all happens quickly enough, it'll look to the human as though all these programs are
running at the same time.
It's a bit like in films where they have these frames, which are snapshots of the actors and the scenery
and so on.
But if you have enough of these frames appearing quickly enough, it looks as though you have continuous
motion.
So task switching is really an optical illusion.
They say "there's no such thing as a free lunch", and that's true for task switching.
The reason is that when a processor is running a program, it needs to have some information about what
that program is doing. There are memory cells on the processor called registers.
And these will contain the value of local variables and also things like the current stack position,
which instruction the program is executing and so on.
When it starts running another program, it's got to load up all this state for the new task. Processors
also tend to have cache these days, which is used for storing the instructions and data that it's using,
which don't fit into the registers.
If the program has not run for a while, this is not going to be in the cache, so it has to be loaded
up.
So there is extra time needed to do that.
And, while this so-called "context switch" is taking place, the processor can't execute any
instructions for any program.
So that slows the whole system down.
So there is definitely overhead to task switching.
In the modern world that we live in, computers usually have several processors, in fact, even mobile
phones have several processors these days.
These are known as cores.
And when we have these cores, these multiple processing units, they can all be working away, doing
different things at the same time, they can even run different parts of the same program at the same
time.
And these are all executing independently of each other.
These are known as "hardware threads" because each core has its own "thread" of execution, if you like,
and there's one hardware thread for each core.
With modern operating systems, they also provide a software feature that behaves a bit like hardware
threads and these are known as "software threads".
So we can have a program which performs multiple activities at the same time at the software level.
Often when we talk about "threads", we mean software threads and we use "cores" when we mean hardware
threads.
Usually there are more software threads than there are hardware threads or there are more threads than
there are cores to run them, and that's not actually a problem because usually threads don't run
all the time.
Quite often they have to stop and wait for something.
They may be waiting for some calculation
that another thread is doing or they may be waiting for -
for example, a thread that is downloading data from the Internet has to wait for the next data to arrive.
A thread that is running Word, has to wait for the next key to be entered.
That gives a space in which a thread isn't running, in which some other thread can run and do some useful
work.
These software threads are managed by the operating system, which uses time slicing.
What support does C++ have for concurrency?
Well, it didn't have any until 2011. Like a lot of C++ libraries, it just gives you the basics really
to write your own library, but what it has is very efficient.
The basic building block for C++ concurrency is the std::thread class, and this will map onto one of the
software threads which is managed by the operating system.
One more bit of terminology we need to clear up.
People often talk about threads and tasks, and sometimes people think they mean the same thing.
In this course, when I talk about threads, I mean the software threads and/or instances of the C++
std::thread class. Tasks are higher level abstractions.
And that's some sort of work that should be performed concurrently, usually by a thread or several
threads.
Okay, so that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.